## Tools And Other Included Extras
+++

Most of them have been mentioned already, but for the sake of completeness – let’s have a quick overview over what you’ll find in the repo:

#### `shoco.c`, `shoco.h`, `shoco_model.h`

The heart of the project. If you don’t want to bother with nitty-gritty details, and the compression works for you, it’s all you’ll ever need.

#### `models/*`

As examples, there are more models included. Feel free to use one of them instead of the default model: Just copy it over `shoco_model.h` and you’re all set. Re-build them with `make models`.

#### `training_data/*`

Some books from [Project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/) used for generating the default model.

#### `shoco.js`

Javascript library, generated by **emscripten**. Also usable as a [node.js](http://nodejs.org/) module (put it in `node_modules` and `require` it). Re-build with `make js`.

#### `shoco.html`

A example of how to use `shoco.js` in a website.

#### `shoco`

A testing tool for compressing and decompressing files. Build it with `make shoco` or just `make`. Use it like this:

```bash
$ shoco compress file-to-compress.txt compressed-file.shoco
$ shoco decompress compressed-file.shoco decompressed-file.txt
```

It’s not meant for production use, because I can’t image why one would want to use **shoco** on entire files.

#### `test_input`

Another testing tool for compressing and decompressing every line in the input file. Build it with `make test_input`. Usage example:

```bash
$ time ./test_input < /usr/share/dict/words 
Number of compressed strings: 479828, average compression ratio: 33%

real   0m0.158s
user   0m0.145s
sys    0m0.013s
```

Adding the command line switch `-v` gives line-by-line information about the compression ratios.

#### `Makefile`

It’s not the cleanest or l33test Makefile ever, but it should give you hints for integrating **shoco** into your project.

#### `tests`

Invoke them with `make check`. They should pass.
